feat(next): routes resolved hook (#10077)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/reference/integrations-reference.mdx

}
```

### `astro:routes:resolved`

<Since v="5.0.0" />

**Previous hook:** [`astro:config:setup`](#astroconfigsetup)

**Next hook:** [`astro:config:done`](#astroconfigdone)

**When:** In `astro dev`, it also runs if a file based route changes (added/removed/updated).

**Why:** To access routes and their metadata

```js
'astro:routes:resolved'?: (options: {
  routes: IntegrationResolvedRoute[];
  logger: AstroIntegrationLogger;
}) => void | Promise<void>;
```

#### `routes` option

**Type:** [`IntegrationResolvedRoute[]`](#integrationresolvedroute-type-reference)

A list of all routes alongside their associated metadata.

You can reference the full `IntegrationResolvedRoute` type below, but the most common properties are:

- `entrypoint` - the input file path relative to the project root

> - `pathname` - the output file URL (undefined for routes using `[dynamic]` and `[...spread]` params)

Reviewer: I'm not a fan of defining twice. If these two are common, is there instead some kind of example with these two? something like:

The following example accesses the `entrypoint` and `pathname` ... 

And don't define them here? Is there some kind of minimal example usage that would work here?

Author: FYI I just copied and adapted what was in `astro:build:done` so maybe we can also update it there with you think is best!

Author: Gotta say I'm struggling to find a good simple example, the `routes` related logic is usually quite involved :sweat:. @Fryuni do you have an idea?

##### `IntegrationResolvedRoute` type reference

```ts
interface IntegrationResolvedRoute {
	/**

> 	 * The current **pattern** of the route. For example:

Author: All those jsdoc come directly from core, and are also in `astro:build:done`. So do you prefer not to update the jsdoc on that page at all, or update them in core and then reflect the changes here?

> 	 * The current **pattern** of the route. For example:

Reviewer: Ah, OK. How important is it that these are kept identical to core? This is public facing docs, and one could argue should be written like docs.

(I was even thinking, this is a LOT of documenting going on *inside* a code sample. Why aren't we writing normal docs here?)

In that case, I'm OK to merge exactly what's already matching, but then think about at some point in the future this page becomes an actual docs page, not just copy paste of whatever you've written in code that I have no control over the quality of. 😅

> 	 * The current **pattern** of the route. For example:

Author: Yeah I think that's a good idea :+1:

	 * - `src/pages/index.astro` has a pattern of `/`
	 * - `src/pages/blog/[...slug].astro` has a pattern of `/blog/[...slug]`
	 * - `src/pages/site/[blog]/[...slug].astro` has a pattern of `/site/[blog]/[...slug]`
	 */
	pattern: RouteData['route'];

	/**
	 *
	 * regex used for matching an input URL against a requested route
	 * ex. "[fruit]/about.astro" will generate the pattern: /^\/([^/]+?)\/about\/?$/
	 * where pattern.test("banana/about") is "true"
	 *
	 * ## Example
	 *
	 * ```js
	 * if (route.pattern.test('/blog')) {
	 *  // do something
	 * }
	 * ```
	 */
	patternRegex: RouteData['pattern'];

	/**
	 *  Source component URL
	 */
	entrypoint: RouteData['component'];

	/**
	 * Whether the route is prerendered or not
	 */
	isPrerendered: RouteData['prerender'];

	/**
	 * The {@link IntegrationResolvedRoute} to redirect to. It's present when `IntegrationResolvedRoute.type` is `redirect`.
	 */
	redirectRoute?: IntegrationResolvedRoute;

  /**
	 * @param {any} data The optional parameters of the route
	 *
	 * @description
	 * A function that accepts a list of params, interpolates them with the route pattern, and returns the path name of the route.
	 *
	 * ## Example
	 *

> 	 * For a route such as `/blog/[...id].astro`, the `generate` function would return something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	 * For the route `/blog/[...id].astro`, the `generate` function returns:
```
As much as possible, try to cut extra words that don't contain "meaning". I know you're showing a "possible example", so everything feels kind of uncertain. But the solution, when possible, is to define a thing, and then say THIS THING GIVES YOU THIS.  Whatever you need to state/assume to avoid being wishy washy is both more readable (more direct! fewer words that don't add to the meaning! easier to translate!) AND makes the reader feel more confident because YOU are giving examples that you are confident about.

	 *
	 * ```js
	 * console.log(generate({ id: 'presentation' })) // will log `/blog/presentation`
	 * ```
	 */
	generate: (data?: any) => string;

  /**

> 	 * Dynamic and spread route params

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	 * Dynamic and spread route params in the file path
```
Is this correct? When we can, try to *explain* in the definition vs just making people guess from the example what pattern they're supposed to learn.

("Params" are... params? Still feels a *little* circular to me, but at least even without the example, now someone could get closer to interpreting that statement.)

	 * ex. "/pages/[lang]/[...slug].astro" will output the params ['lang', '...slug']
	 */
	params: string[];

  /**

> 	 * Output URL pathname where this route will be served

Reviewer: I noticed there's no example here, but there is for most other things. Is there a short helpful one we could put here?

	 * note: will be undefined for [dynamic] and [...spread] routes
	 */
	pathname?: string;

  /**

> 	 * Similar to the "params" field, but with more associated metadata. For example, for `/site/[blog]/[...slug].astro`, the segments are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	 * An array of metadata for each segment (separated by `/`) of the route pattern. Includes the `content` of the segment, as well as whether or not the path segment is dynamic and spread. For example, for `/site/[blog]/[...slug].astro`, the segments are:
```
OK, you might need to fix this up but this seemed more related to `pattern` in my mind than params, since params don't care about the static segments.

	 *
	 * 1. `{ content: 'site', dynamic: false, spread: false }`
	 * 2. `{ content: 'blog', dynamic: true, spread: false }`
	 * 3. `{ content: '...slug', dynamic: true, spread: true }`
	 */
	segments: RoutePart[][];

  /**
	 *
	 * The type of the route. It can be:
	 * - `page`: a route that lives in the file system, usually an Astro component
	 * - `endpoint`: a route that lives in the file system, usually a JS file that exposes endpoints methods

> 	 * - `redirect`: a route points to another route that lives in the file system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	 * - `redirect`: a route that points to another route that lives in the file system
```

> 	 * - `fallback`: a route that doesn't exist in the file system that needs to be handled with other means, usually the middleware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	 * - `fallback`: a route that doesn't exist in the file system and is handled with other means, usually middleware
```

	 */
	type: RouteType;

  /**
	 * The route to redirect to. It holds information regarding the status code and its destination.
	 */
	redirect?: RedirectConfig;

  /**

> 	 * Whether the route comes from Astro core, an integration or the user's project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	 * Whether the route is generated internally by Astro core, externally by an integration or by the user's project
```

}
```

### `astro:routes:resolved`

<Since v="5.0.0" />

**Previous hook:** [`astro:config:setup`](#astroconfigsetup)

**Next hook:** [`astro:config:done`](#astroconfigdone)

**When:** In `astro dev`, it also runs if a file based route changes (added/removed/updated).

**Why:** To access routes and their metadata

```js
'astro:routes:resolved'?: (options: {
  routes: IntegrationResolvedRoute[];
  logger: AstroIntegrationLogger;
}) => void | Promise<void>;
```

#### `routes` option

**Type:** [`IntegrationResolvedRoute[]`](#integrationresolvedroute-type-reference)

> A list of all routes with their associated metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A list of all routes with their associated metadata.

Example use:
```
How about a tiny statement that it's an example, then good to go??

}
```

#### `assets` option

<Since v="5.0.0" />

**Type:** `Map<string, URL[]>`

> Contains URLs to output files paths, grouped by [`IntegrationResolvedRoute`](#integrationresolvedroute-type-reference) `pattern` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contains URLs to output files paths, grouped by the [`IntegrationResolvedRoute`](#integrationresolvedroute-type-reference) `pattern` property.
```
Does this need a "the"?
